docs: Add tokenizer documentation (#202)
software-mansion/react-native-executorch: docs/docs/natural-language-processing/useTokenizer.md

---
title: useTokenizer
sidebar_position: 4
keywords:
  [
    tokenizer,
    text tokenizer,
    tokenization,
    react native,
    executorch,
    ai,
    machine learning,
    on-device,
    mobile ai,
  ]
description: "Learn how to tokenize your text in your React Native applications using React Native ExecuTorch's useTokenizer hook."
---

> Tokenization is the process of breaking down text into smaller units called tokens, which can be words, characters, or subwords. It’s a crucial step in natural language processing that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tokenization is the process of breaking down text into smaller units called tokens. It’s a crucial step in natural language processing that
```

:::

## Reference

```typescript
import {
  useTokenizer,
  ALL_MINILM_L6_V2_TOKENIZER,
} from 'react-native-executorch';

const tokenizer = useTokenizer({
  tokenizerSource: ALL_MINILM_L6_V2_TOKENIZER,
});

const text = 'Hello, world!';

try {
  // Tokenize the text
  const tokens = await tokenizer.encode(text);
  console.log('Tokens:', tokens);

  // Decode the tokens back to text
  const decodedText = await tokenizer.decode(tokens);
  console.log('Decoded text:', decodedText);
} catch (error) {
  console.error('Error tokenizing text:', error);
}
```

## Arguments

A string that specifies the path or URI of the tokenizer JSON file.

### Returns

| Field              | Type                                  | Description                                                           |
| ------------------ | ------------------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `encode`           | `(text: string) => Promise<number[]>` | Converts a string into an array of token IDs.                         |

> | `decode`           | `(ids: number[]) => Promise<string>`  | Converts a list of token IDs back into a string.                      |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `decode`           | `(ids: number[]) => Promise<string>`  | Converts a list of token IDs into a string.                      |
```

| `getVocabSize`     | `() => Promise<number>`               | Returns the size of the tokenizer's vocabulary.                       |

> | `idToToken`        | `(id: number) => Promise<string>`     | Returns the token string for a given token ID.                        |
> | `tokenToId`        | `(token: string) => Promise<number>`  | Returns the token ID for a given token string.                        |

Reviewer: Let's keep the same naming convention as is in HuggingFace docs
```suggestion
| `idToToken`        | `(id: number) => Promise<string>`     | Returns the token associated to the ID.                        |
| `tokenToId`        | `(token: string) => Promise<number>`  | Returns the  ID associated to the token.                        |
```

> | `error`            | <code>string &#124; null</code>       | Contains the error message if the tokenizer failed to load.           |

Reviewer: Is this the only possible error, if the tokenizer fails to load?

Author: In current implementation, yes. Other errors are thrown.
